THE ENGLISH NOVEL
BY
GEORGE SAINTSBURY
PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH
LONDON: J.M. DENT & SONS LTD.
BEDFORD STREET, STRAND 1913
NEW YORK: E.P. BUTTON & CO.
PREFACE
here are not many better metrical specimens than Ywain and Gawain, b
ut it has less character-interest, actual or possible, than those which have 
been commented on. The hero, King Urien's son, accepts an a
dventure in which another knight of the Table, Sir Colgrevance, has fared ill, after
 it has been told in a conversation at court which is joined in first by the Que
en and afterwards by the King. Sir Kay here shows his 
usual cross-grainedness; and Guinevere "with milde mood" requests to know "
What the devil is thee within?" The adventure is of
 a class well known in romance. You ride to a certain fountain, pour wate
r from it on a stone, and then, after divers marvels, have to do
 battle with a redoubtable knight. Colgrevance has fared badly; Kay is
 as usual quite sure that he would fare better; but Yw
ain actually undertakes the task. He has a tough battle with the knight who answers the challenge
, but wounds him mortally; and when the knight flies to his neighbour
ing castle, is so hard on his heels that the portcullis actually drops on his horse'
s haunches just behind the saddle, and cuts the beast in two. Ywain is thus 
left between the portcullis and the (by this time shut
) door—a position all the more awkward that the knight himself expir
es immediately after he has reached shelter. The situation is saved, howev
er, by the guardian damsel of romance, Lunet (the Linet or Lynett
e of the Beaumains-Gareth story), who emerges from a postern between gate
 and portcullis and conveys the intruder safe to her own chamber. Here a magic b
ed makes him invisible: though the whole castle, including the very room, is
 ransacked by the dead knight's people and would-be revengers, 
at the bidding of his widow.
This widow, however, is rather an Ephesian matron. The sagacious Lunet,
 whose confidante she is, suggests to her that, unles
s she enlists some doughty knight as her champion, the king will confiscate
 her fief; and that there is no champion like a husband. A very little more finesse eff
ects the marriage, even though the lady is made aware of the identi
ty of her new lover and her own husband's slayer. (It is of course necessary to reme
mber that the death of a combatant in fairly challenged and
 fought single contest was not reckoned as any fault to his antagonist.) Ywain actually
 shows his prowess against the King: and has an opportunity of showing Kay once more that it i
s one thing to blame other people for failing, and anoth
er to succeed yourself. And after this the newly married pair live t
ogether happily for a time. But it was reckoned a fault in a knight to take t
oo prolonged a honeymoon: and Ywain, after what the French call adieux 
déchirants, obtains leave for the usual "twelvemonth and a day,"
 at the expiration of which, on St. John's Eve, he is without fail to return,
 the engagement being sealed by the gift from his lady of a special ring. He forgets his 
promise of course: and at the stated time a damsel appears, sternly demands the ring, a
nd announces her lady's decision to have nothing further to do with him. There is
 in such cases only one thing for any true knight, from Sir Lancelot to 
Sir Amadis, to do: and that is to go mad, divest himself of his garments, and take to the 
greenwood. This Ywain duly does, supporting himself at fi
rst on the raw flesh of game which he kills with a bow and arrows wrested from a chance-c
omer; and then on less savage but still simple food supplied by a b
enevolent hermit. As he lies asleep under a tree, a lady rides by with atte
ndants, and one of these (another of the wise damsels of romance) recognises
 him as Sir Ywain. The lady has at the time sore need of a champion agai
nst a hostile earl, and she also fortunately possesses a box of ointment
 infallible against madness, which Morgane la Faye has given her. With this 
the damsel is sent back to anoint Ywain. He comes to his s
enses, is armed and clothed, undertakes the lady's defence, and discomfits the 
earl: but is as miserable as ever. Resisting the lady's offer of hers
elf and all her possessions, he rides off once more "with heavy heart and dreary cheer."

Soon he hears a hideous noise and, riding in its direction, find
s that a dragon has attacked a lion. He succours the holier beast, kills the dragon, and though 
he has unavoidably wounded the lion in the mêlée is thenceforth attended by 
him not merely as a food-provider, but as the doughtiest of squires and comrades
 in fight. To aggravate his sorrow he comes to the fount
ain and thorn-tree of the original adventure, and hears some one complaining in the chapel 
hard by. They exchange questions. "A man," he said, "some time I was" (which must be one of the ear
liest occurrences in English of a striking phrase), and the prisoner turns out
 to be Lunet. She has been accused of treason by the usual steward (it is very hard for a s
teward of romance to be good) and two brothers—of treason to her
 lady, and is to be burnt, unless she can find a knight who will fight 
the three. Ywain agrees to defend her: but before he can carry out
 his promise he has, on the same morning, to meet a terrible giant who is molesting his hosts at a
 castle where he is guested. Both adventures, however, ar
e achieved on the same day, with very notable aid from the lion: and Ywain unde
rtakes a fresh one, being recruited by the necessary damsel-messenger, against tw
o half-fiend brother knights. They stipulate that the lion is
 to be forcibly prevented from interfering, and he is loc
ked up in a room; but, hearing the noise of battle, he scratches up the earth under the door, fre
es himself, and once more succours his master at the nick of time
. Even this does not expiate Ywain's fault: and yet another task falls to him—the championship of t
he rights of the younger of a pair of sisters, the elder of whom has secured 
no less a representative than Gawain himself. The pair, unknow
ing and unknown, fight all day long before Arthur's court with 
no advantage on either side: and when the light fails an interchange of courtesies leads t
o recognition and the settlement of the dispute. Now
 the tale is nearly full. Ywain rides yet again to the magic fountain and performs the rit
e; there is no one to meet him; the castle rocks and t
he inmates quake. But the crafty Lunet persuades h
er mistress to swear that if the Knight of the Lion, who has fallen
 at variance with his lady, will come to the rescue, she will do all
 she can to reconcile the pair. Which not ill-prepared "curtain
" duly falls: leaving us comfortably assured that Ywain and his Lady and Lunet and the 
Lion (one wishes that these two could have made a match of it, and he must surely have been a b
ewitched knight) lived happily
"Until that death had driven them down."
This, it has been said, is a specimen of the pure romance; with little except 
incident in it, and a touch or two of manners. It does not, as the others noti
ced above do, lend itself much to character-drawing. But it is spiritedly told; though roughe
r, it is much more vigorous than the French original; 
and the mere expletives and stock phrases, which are the cur
se of these romances, do not obtrude themselves to
o much. In this respect, and some others, it is the superior of the one coupled abov
e with it, Lybius Disconus, which is closer, except in names, to the Beaumains story. Sti
ll, this also is not a bad specimen of the same class. The hero of it 
is a son, not a brother, of Gawain, comes nameless or nicknamed, but as "Beaufils
," not "Beaumains," to Arthur's court, and is knighted at once,
 not made to go through the "kitchen-knave" stage. Accordingly, the damsel Elen
e (not Lunet), to whom he is assigned as champion i
n the adventure of the Lady of Sinadowne, objects only to his novelty 
of knighthood and is converted by his first victory. The course of the adventures is, however, d
ifferent from that which some people know from Malory, and many from Tennyson. One of them is farcic
al: the Fair Unknown rescues a damsel at her utmost need from two giants, a red and a black, one o
f whom is roasting a wild boar and uses the animal as a weapon, with the spit in it, fo
r the combat. Moreover, he falls a victim to the wile
s of a sorceress-chatelaine whom he has also succoured: and it is only
 after the year and day that Elene goads him on to his proper qu
est. But this also is no bad story.
The limits of this volume admit of not much farther "argument" (though the writer would v
ery gladly give it) of these minor romances of adventure, Arthurian an
d other. Ellis's easily accessible book supplies abstracts of the main Arthurian story b
efore Malory; of the two most famous, though by no means best, of all the non-Arthurian romanc
es, Guy of Warwick and Bevis of Hampton (the former of which was handled and 
rehandled from age to age, moralised, curtailed, lengthened, and hashed up in every form); of the
 brilliant and vigorous Richard Coeur-de-Lion; of the less racy Charlemagne romance
s in English; of the Seven Wise Masters, brought from the Ea
st and naturalised all over Europe; of the delightful 
love story of Florice and Blancheflour; of that powerful and pathetic legend of the Pro
ud King (Robert of Sicily), which Longfellow and Mr. Wil
liam Morris both modernised, each in his way; of those other lege
nds, Sir Isumbras and Amis and Amillion, which are so beautiful to those 
who can appreciate the mediæval mind, and to the beauty of which others seem insensible; of 
Sir Triamond and Sir Eglamour (examples of the romance at its
 weakest); of the exceedingly spirited and interesting Ipomydon, and of some others, i
ncluding the best of Scotch romances, Sir Eger, Sir Grame, and Sir Graysteel. But
 Ellis could not know others, and he left alone yet others that h
e might have known—the exquisite Sir Launfal of Thomas Chester at the beg
inning of the fifteenth century, where an unworthy presentment of Guinevere is c
ompensated by the gracious image of Launfal's fair
y love; the lively adventures of William of Palerne, who had a werewolf for his
 friend and an emperor's daughter for his love, eloping with her in white bear-skins, the unusua
l meat of which was being cooked in her father's kitchen; 
Sir Orfeo—Orpheus and Eurydice, with a happy ending; Emarè, one of the tales of inno
cent but persecuted heroines of which Chaucer's Constance
 is the best known; Florence of Rome; the rather famous Squire of Low Degree; Sir Amadas, not
 a very good handling of a fine motive, charity to a corpse; many others.
Nor does he seem to have known one of the finest of all—the alliterative romance of
 Gawain and the Green Knight which, since Dr. Morris published it some forty years a
go for the Early English Text Society, has made its way through text-books int
o more general knowledge than most of its fellows e
njoy. In this the hero is tempted repeatedly, elaborately, and wi
th great knowledge of nature and no small command of art on
 the teller's part, by the wife of his host and destined antagonist. He resis
ts in the main, but succumbs in the point of accepting a magic pre
servative as a gift: and is discovered and lectured accordingly. It is curious that this, wh
ich is far above the usual mere adventure-story and
 is novel of a high kind as well as romance, has no known French 
original; and is strongly English in many characteristics besides its verse-fo
rm.
On the whole, however, one need have no difficulty in admitting that the majority o
f these romances do somewhat content themselves with incident, i
ncident only, and incident not merely of a naïf but of a stock kind, for the
ir staple. There are striking situations, even str
iking phrases, here and there; there is plenty of variety in scene, and m
ore than is sometimes thought in detail; but the motive-and-character-in
terest is rarely utilised as it might be, and very general
ly is not even suggested. There is seldom any real plot or "fable"—only a
 chain of events: and though no one but a very dull person will object to 
the supernatural element, or to the exaggerated feats o
f professedly natural prowess and endurance, it cannot be said t
hat on the whole they are artistically managed. You feel, not merely tha
t the picture would have been better if the painter had taken more pains, but that the rea
son why he did not is that he did not know how.
Sir Thomas Malory, himself most unknown perhaps of all great writers, did know how; and a cynical
 person might echo the I nunc of the Roman satirist, and dwell on the futility
 of doing great things, in reference to the fact that it u
sed to be fashionable, and is still not uncommon, to call Malory a "mere 
compiler." Indeed from the direction which modern study
 so often takes, of putting inquiry into origins abov
e everything, and neglecting the consideration of the work as work, this practice is no
t likely soon to cease. But no mistake about the mysterious Englishman (the place-name
s with which the designation is connected are all pure English) is possible to any one
 who has read his book, and who knows what prose fiction is. The Noble Histories of King A
rthur, La Morte d'Arthur, The Story of the most Noble and 
Worthy King Arthur, The Most Ancient and Famous History of the Renowned Prin
ce Arthur, The Birth, Life, and Acts of King Arthur—call it by whichever name anybody likes of t
hose which various printers and reprinters have given it—is one of
 the great books of the world. If they can give us any single "Frenc
h book"—the reference to which is a commonplace of the subje
ct—from which it was taken, let them; they have not yet. If they point out (as th
ey can) French and English books from which parts of it were taken, similar things ma
y be done with Dante and Chaucer, with Shakespeare and Milton, and 
very probably could have been done with Homer. It is wh
at the artist does with his materials, not where he gets them, that is the question. And M
alory has done, with his materials, a very great thing indeed. He is working no doubt to a cer
tain extent blindly; working much better than he knows, and 
sometimes as he would not work if he knew better; though whether he would work as well if
 he knew better is quite a different point. Sometimes he may not take the b
est available version of a story; but we must ask ourselves
 whether he knew it. Sometimes he may put in what we do not want: but we m
ust ask ourselves whether there was not a reason for
 doing so, to him if not to us. What is certain is that he, and he only in any l
anguage, makes of this vast assemblage of stories one story, and one book. He does it (much more t
han half unconsciously no doubt) by following the lines of, a
s I suppose, Walter Map, and fusing the different motives, holdin
g to this method even in parts of the legend with which, so far as one kn
ows, Map cannot have meddled. Before him this legend consisted of half a dozen gr
eat divisions—a word which may be used of malice prepense. Thes
e were the story of Merlin, that of Arthur's own origin, and that of the previous history of the Gr
aal for introduction; the story of Arthur's winning the throne, of the Round Table, and of the 
marriage with Guinevere, also endless branchings of special knights' ad
ventures, and of the wars with the Saxons and the Romans, and the episode of th
e False Guinevere—with whom for a time Arthur lives as w
ith his queen—for middle; and the story of the Graal-quest, the love of Lancelot for the Queen, a
nd the rebellion of Mordred with its fatal consequences, for close. Exactl
y how much of this Malory personally had before him we cannot of course say: but of any working u
p of the whole that would have spared him trouble, and robbed him of credit, we do no
t know. In fact the favourite term "compiler" gives up the only 
dangerous point. Now in what way did Malory compile? In the way in which the ordinary compiler proc
eeds he most emphatically does not. He cuts down the prelimina
ries mercilessly: but they can be perfectly well spared. He misses almost a
ll the wars with the Saxons, which are the most tedious parts of the or
iginals. He adopts, most happily, the early, not the late, placing of those with the Roman
s. He drops the false Guinevere altogether, which is imperative, t
hat the true one may have no right to plead the incident—th
ough he does not represent Arthur as "blameless." He gives the roman d'aventu
res side of the Round Table stories, from the great Tristram and Palom
ides romances through the Beaumains episode downwards, bec
ause they are interesting in themselves and lead up to the Graal quest.
 He gives that Quest as plentifully because it leads up to the "dolorous death and departing o
ut of this world of them all." How he gives the Lancelot and Guinevere tragedy we shall see 
presently. And the catastrophe of the actual "departing" he gives perfectly; with th
e magnificent final scenes which he has converted, sometimes 
in almost Shakespearean fashion, by the slightest verbal touch
es from mediocre verse to splendid prose. A very remarkable compiler! It is a p
ity that they did not take him and cut him up in little stars for a light to all 
his brethren in compiling thereafter.
For he has what no compiler as such can have—becaus
e the moment he has it he ceases to be a compiler, and becomes an artist—the s
ense of grasp, the power to put his finger, and to kee
p it, on the central pulse and nerve of the story. That he did this deliberately i
s so unlikely as to be practically impossible: that he did it is certain. T
he Arthurian Legend is the greatest of mediæval creations as a subject—a "fable"—just as the Divina 
Commedia is the greatest of mediæval "imitations" and works of art. And as such i
t is inevitable that it should carry with it the sense of the greatest medieval differences, Chi
valry and Romance. The strong point of these differences is the way in which t
hey combine the three great motives, as Dante isolates them, of Valour, Love, a
nd Religion. The ancients never realised this combination at all; the moderns have merely 
struggled after it, or blasphemed it in fox-and-grapes fashion: the mediævals had i
t—in theory at any rate. The Round Table stories, merely as su
ch, illustrate Valour; the Graal stories, Religion; the 
passion of Lancelot and Guinevere with the minor insta
nces, Love. All these have their ἁμαρτἱα—their tragic and tragedy-causing fault and flaw. The 
knight wastes his valour in idle bickerings; he forget
s law in his love; and though there is no actual degr
adation of religion, he fails to live up to the ideal that he d
oes not actually forswear. To throw the presentation—the mimesis—of all this into per
fectly worthy form would probably have been too much for any si
ngle genius of that curious time (when genius was so widely s
pread and so little concentrated) except Dante himself, whose hand found other wo
rk to do. To colour and shape the various fragments of the mosaic was the work of scores
. To put them together, if not in absolutely perfect yet in more than sufficie
nt shape, was, so far as we know, the luck of Malory only: though some 
one (Map or another) had done a mighty day's work long before in creating the figure and t
he adventures of Lancelot and imagining the later quest of the Gra
al with the figure of Galahad—that "improved Percivale," as the seedsmen say.
But besides this power of shaping (or even of merely combinin
g) scattered elements into a story, Malory has another
—the other of the first importance to the novelist proper—in his attraction to character, 
if not exactly in his making up of it. It has been said above that the defect of the pure romances—
especially those of continental origin—is the absence of this. What 
the Greeks called διἁνοια—"sentiment," "thought," "cast of t
hought," as it has been variously rendered—is even more
 absent from them than plot or character itself: and of 
its almost necessary connection with this latter they often seem to have no idea.
 Very rare is such a touch as that of Sir Amadas being unable at t
he feast to get rid of the memory of the unburied corpse, kept by enemies from the kindly eart
h that would hide it, and the rites that would help it to peace: stil
l rarer that in Guy of Warwick when the hero, at t
he height of his fame and in the full enjoyment of his desir
es, looks from the tower and is struck by the selfishness and earthliness of his career. The first
 notion is not "improved" in the original at all, and the second very badly; but in m
ost of the others such things do not even exist. Now the 
greater Legend is full of situations which encourage s
uch thoughts, and even of expressed thoughts that only need craftsmanship to tu
rn them into the cornerstones of character-building, and 
the jewels, five or fifty words long, of literature. The 
fate and metaphysical aid that determine the relations of Tristram and 
Iseult; the unconscious incest of Arthur and Margause with i
ts Greek-tragic consequence; the unrewarded fidelity of Palomides, and (an early instance of the s
oon to be triumphant allegory) his fruitless chase of the 
Beast Glatissant; all these are matters in point. But 
of course the main nursery of such things is the L
ancelot-and-Guinevere story itself. Nobody has yet made Guinevere a person—nobo
dy but Shakespeare could have done so perhaps, though Shakespeare's Guinevere would probably have b
een the greatest woman in all art. But Malory has not been t
he least successful with her: and of Lancelot he has made, if only in 
study, one of the great characters of that fictitious world which is so much true
r than the real. And let no one say that we are reading Tenn
yson or any one else into Malory. There are yet persons, at least at the time this was
 written not quite Methusalahs, who read the Morte d'Arthur before th
e Idylls appeared and who have never allowed even the Idylls to overlay their original idea of the
 most perfect and most gentle of knights.
It is probable indeed that Malory invented little or nothing in the various situati
ons, by which the character of Lancelot, and the history of his fatal love, are ev
olved. We know in most cases that this is so. It is possible, too, that at fir
st (probably because the possibilities had not dawne
d on him, as it has been admitted they never did very con
sciously) he has not made the most of the introduction of lover and lady. But when the
 interest becomes concentrated, as in the various passages of Guinevere's wrath with her lover 
and their consequences, or in the final series of catastrophes, he is fully equal to the occa
sion. We know—this time to his credit—how he has improved, in the act of borrow
ing them, the earlier verse-pictures of the final parting of the lovers, and there a
re many other episodes and juxtapositions of which as much may
 be said. That except as to Lancelot's remorse (which after all is the great point)
 there is not much actual talk about motive and sentimen
t is nothing; or nothing but the condition of the time. The important point is
 that, as the electricians say, "the house is wired" 
for the actual installation of character-novelling
. There is here the complete scenario, and a good 
deal more, for a novel as long as Clarissa and much more interesting, capable of being worked ou
t in the manner, not merely of Richardson himself, but of Mr. Meredith or Mr. Hardy
. It is a great romance, if not the greatest of romances: it has a great novel, if 
not the greatest of novels, written in sympathetic ink between the lines, a
nd with more than a little of the writing sometimes emerging to view.
Little in the restricted space here available can be, though much might b
e in a larger, said about the remaining attempts in English fic
tion before the middle of the sixteenth century. The later romances, down to those of Lo
rd Berners, show the character of the older with a certain addition of the "con
juror's supernatural" of the Amadis school. But the short verse-tales, especially
 those of the Robin Hood cycle, and some of the purely comi
c kind, introduce an important variation of interest: and 
even some of the longer, such as that Tale of Beryn, which use
d to be included in Chaucer's works, vary the chivalrous model in a us
eful way. Still more important is the influence of 
the short prose tale:—first Latin, as in the Gesta Rom
anorum (which of course had older and positively mediæval forerunners), 
then Italian and French. The prose saved the writer from verbiage and stock phrase; the shortnes
s from the tendency to "watering out" which is the curse of the long verse or prose romanc
e. Moreover, to get point and appeal, it was especially neces
sary to throw up the subject—incident, emotion, or whatever it was—to bring it out
; not merely to meander and palaver about it. But language and literature were both too much i
n a state of transition to admit of anything capital being done at th
is time. It was the great good fortune of England, corresponding to that experienced wi
th Chaucer in poetry three quarters of a century earlier, that Malory came t
o give the sum and substance of what mediæval fiction could do
 in prose. For more, the times and the men had to come.
CHAPTER II
FROM LYLY TO SWIFT
During the dying-off of romance proper, or its transference from verse to prose in
 the late fifteenth and earlier sixteenth century, there is not 
very much to note about prose fiction in England. 
But, as the conditions of modern literature fashioned themselv
es, a very great influence in this as in other departments was no doubt exercised with us by Italia
n, as well as some by Spanish in a way which may be postponed for a little. The Italian prose 
tale had begun to exercise that influence as early as Chaucer's time: but c
ircumstances and atmosphere were as yet unfavourable for its growth. It is a hackneyed 
truism that Italian society was very much more modern than any other in Eu
rope at this time—in fact it would not be a mere paradox to say that it was, and
 continued to be till the later sixteenth, much more modern than it has ever been 
since—or till very recently. By "modern" is here meant the kind of society whi
ch is fairly cultivated, fairly comfortable, fairly complicated with classes no
t very sharply separated from each other, not dominated by any very high ideals, tolerabl
y corrupt, and sufficiently business-like. The Italian n
ovella, of course, admits wild passions and extravagant crimes: but the general tone of it is b
ourgeois—at any rate domestic. With its great number of si
tuations and motives, presented in miniature, careful work is nec
essary to bring out the effect: and, above all, there is abu
ndant room for study of manners, for proverbial and pop
ular wisdom and witticism, for "furniture"—to use that word in a wide 
sense. Above all, the Italian mind, like the Greek, had an ethical twist—twist in more senses than o
ne, some would say, but that does not matter. Manners, morals, motive
s—these three could not but displace, to some extent, mere incident: though there was gen
erally incident of a poignant or piquant kind as wel
l. In other words the novella was actually (though stil
l in miniature) a novel in nature as well as in name. And these nove
lle became, as is generally known, common in English translations after the middle of the 
sixteenth century. Painter's huge Palace of Pleasure (1566) is only the la
rgest and best known of many translations, single an
d collected, of the Italian novellieri and the French tale-tellers, contempora
ry, or of times more or less earlier.
For some time, as almost everybody knows, these collections of translated matter
 served a purpose—great indeed, but somewhat outside their proper
 department—by furnishing the Elizabethan dramatists with a large part—perhaps the larger pa
rt—of their subjects. But they very soon began to exerci
se it directly by suggesting the fictitious part of the prose pamphlet—a
 department which, though infinitely less well known
 than the plays, and still not very easy to know, holds almost the second position
 as representing the popular literature of the Elizabethan time. And they also
 had—in one case certainly, in the other probably—no little inf
luence upon the two great Elizabethan works which in a manner founded the m
odern novel and the modern romance in English—the Euphues of Lyly and the Arc
adia of Sir Philip Sidney.
The pamphlet stories (which are themselves often play-connected, as in the case of Lodge's Ros
alynde and Greene's Pandosto) do not require much notice, with
 one exception—Nash's Jack Wilton or the Unfortunate Traveller, 
to which some have assigned a position equal, or perhaps superior in
 our particular subject, to that of the Arcadia or that of Euphues. This seems to the pre
sent writer a mistake: but as to appear important is (in a not wholly unreal sense) to be 
so, the piece shall be separately considered. The rest are mostly 
marred by a superabundance of rather rudimentary art, and a very poor allowance of matter. Th
ere is hardly any character, and except in a few pi
eces, such as Lodge's Margarite of America, there is little attempt to utilise new scenes and co
nditions. But the whole class has special interest for us in one
 peculiarity which makes it perhaps unreadable to any but students,
 and that is its saturation with the Elizabethan conceit and word-play which is sometimes called Eup
huism. Nor is this wonderful, considering that more than one o
f these "pamphlets" is directly connected with the matter and the perso
nages of Euphues itself. To this famous book, therefore, we had better turn.
Some people, it is believed, have denied that Euphues is a novel at a
ll; and some of these some have been almost indignant at its being called one. It is certai
nly, with Rasselas, the most remarkable example, in English, of a 
novel which is to a great extent deprived of the agrémens to which we have for som
e two centuries been accustomed in the kind, and, to a still greater, loaded with others which 
do not appeal to us. To put aside altogether its e
xtraordinary and in a way epoch-making style, which giv
es it its main actual place in the history of English literature, it is further loaded with didac
tic digressions which, though certain later novelists h
ave been somewhat peccant in the kind, have never been quite equalled—no, 
not in Rasselas itself or the Fool of Quality. But if anybody, who has the necessary 
knowledge to understand, and therefore the necessary patience to tolerate, these knotty knarry envel
opes, insertions, and excrescences, will for the moment pay no attention t
o them, but merely strip them off, he will find the carcas
s of a very tolerable novel left behind. The first plot of Philautus—Euphues—Lucilla, and the
 successive jilting of the two friends for each other and for Curio, is no mean novel-substan
ce. Not Balzac himself, certainly no one of his successors, need d
isdain it: and more than one of them has taken up something like it. The jour
ney from Naples to London, and the episode of Fidus and Iffida, 
could have been worked up, in the good old three-volume days, to a mo
st effective second volume. And the picture of the court, with the furth
er loves of Philautus, Camilla, and the "violet" Frances, w
ould supply a third of themselves even if Euphues were left out, though some livelier pr
esentation of his character (which Lyly himself was obviously too much
 personally interested to make at all clear) would
 improve the whole immensely. But it was still too early: t
he thing was not yet to be done. Only, I do not kn
ow any book in which the possibilities, and even the outlines, of this thing were indicated
 and vaguely sketched earlier in any European language, unless it be th
e Lucretia and Euryalus of Æneas Silvius, which is much more conf
ined in its scope.
The fact is that the very confusedness, the many undeveloped sides, of Euphues, make it much mo
re of an ancestor of the modern novel than if it were more of a piece. The quicquid agunt homine
s is as much the province of the novel as of the sat
ire; and there is more than something of this as it affected Elizabethan
 times in Euphues. Men's interest in morals, politics, and education; their development of the mo
dern idea of society; their taste for letters; their conceits and fancies—all these appear in 
it.
The Arcadia stands in a different compartment. Euphues is very much 
sui generis: failure as it may be from some points of view, it
 deserves the highest respect for this, and like most other things sui 
generis it was destined to propagate the genus, if only after many days. The Arcadia 
was in intention certainly, and to great extent in act
ual fact, merely a carrying out of the attempt, common all over E
urope (as a result of the critical searchings of heart of the Italians), to practise a ne
w kind—the Heroic Romance of the sub-variety called pastoral. The "heroic" i
dea generally was (as ought to be, but perhaps is not, well known) to blend, after a fashion, clas
sical and romantic characteristics—to substitute something like the classic un
ity of fable or plot for the mere "meandering" of ro
mantic story, and to pay at least as much attention to characte
r as the classics had paid, instead of neglecting it altogether, as had recently 
though not always been the case in Romance. But the scheme retained on the other hand the varie
ty of incident and appeal of this latter: and especially assigned to Love the 
high place which Romance had given it. As for the Pastoral—that is almost a story to itself, and
 a story which has been only once (by Mr. W.W. Greg) satisfactorily, and then not quite c
ompletely, told. It is enough to say here, and as affecting our own subject, 
that it supplied a new opportunity of gratifying the passion of the R
enaissance for imitating antiquity, at the same time permitting to 
no small extent the introduction of things that were really romantic, and 
above all providing a convention. The Heroic romance generally and the Pasto
ral in particular went directly back to the Greek romances of Heliodo
rus and Longus: but they admitted many new and foreign elements.
At the same time, bastard as the heroic romance was, it
 could not but exercise an important influence on the future of fiction
, inasmuch as it combined, or attempted to combine, w
ith classical unity and mediæval variety the more modern interest of m
anners and (sometimes) personality. Sidney's attempt (which, it must be remembered, is not certain
ly known to be wholly his as it stands, and is certainly kno
wn not to have been revised by him for publication) exercised a 
very great influence in English. For its popularity was enormous, a
nd it doubtless served as shoehorn to draw on that of the English translations of French
 and Spanish romance which supplied, during the greater part of the seventeenth ce
ntury, the want of original composition of the kind.
 The unconscionable amount of talk and of writing "about it and about it" which Euphues 
and the minor Euphuist romances display is at least as pro
minent in the Arcadia: and this talk rarely takes a form congenial
 to the modern novel reader's demands. Moreover, though there really is a plot, an
d a sufficient amount of incident, this reader undoubtedly, and to no small extent justly, demands t
hat both incident and plot shall be more disengaged from 
their framework—that they should be brought into higher relief, should stand out more th
an is the case. Yet further, the pure character-interest is small—i
s almost nonexistent: and the rococo-mosaic of manners and sentiment which was
 to prove the curse of the heroic romance generally 
prevents much interest being felt in that direction.1 It 
would also be impossible to devise a style less suited to prose narrative, e
xcept of a very peculiar kind and on a small scale, than that either of Euphues or of the 
Arcadia, which, though an uncritical tradition credits it with 
driving out Lyly's, is practically only a whelp of the same litter. Embarrass
ed, heavy, rhetorical, it has its place in the genera
l evolution of English prose, and a proper and valuable place too.
 But it is bad even for pure romance purposes: and nearly hopeless for the panoramic
 and kaleidoscopic variety which should characteri
se the novel. To the actual successors of the Arcadia in English we shall come presently.

The Unfortunate Traveller is of much less importance than the oth
er two. It has obtained such reputation as it possesses, p
artly because of its invention or improvement of the fable of "S
urrey and Geraldine"; more, and more justly, because it does work up a certain 
amount of historical material—the wars of Henry VIII. in French Flanders—
into something premonitory (with a little kindness on the part of the premonished) of the great a
nd long missed historical novel; still more for something else. Nash, with his quick wit, seems to 
have been really the first to perceive the capabilities of that foreign travel and obse
rvation of manners which was becoming common, stripped of the
 special atmosphere of pilgrimage which had formerly enveloped it. Even here
, he had had the "notion of the notion" supplied t
o him by Lyly in Euphues: and a tolerably skilful advocate would not ha
ve so very much difficulty in claiming the book as one of the tribe of Euphuis
t pamphlets. But Jack Wilton the "traveller" is a little more of a person than the pedagogic Euphue
s and the shadowy Philautus. At any rate he has a very stro
ng anticipation of Defoe, whose "Cavalier" was not improbably suggested by
 him. But Nash has neither the patience of Defoe, nor that singular
 originality, which accompanies in the author of Moll Flanders a certain inability to 
make the most of it. The Unfortunate Traveller is a sort of compilation or congeries of curr
ent fabliaux, novelle, and facetiæ, with the introduction of famous actual pers
ons of the time, from the crowned heads of the period, through Luther a
nd Aretine downwards, to give bait and attraction. Sometimes it reminds one of a working up of the
 Colloquies of Erasmus: three centuries earlier than The Cl
oister and the Hearth, with much less genius than Charles Reade's, and still more without
 his illegitimate advantage of actual novels behind him for 
nearly half the time. But it gives us "disjectæ membra novellæ" rather than a novel itself: 
and the oftener one reads it the more clear one is that the time for writing novels ha
d not yet come. The materials are there; the desire to utilise—and even a fai
nt vague idea of how to utilise—them is there; but the 
art is almost completely absent. Even regarded as an early attempt in the "picaresque" manner, 
it is abortive and only half organised.
The subject of the English "Heroic" Romance, in the wide sense, is one which has been very li
ttle dealt with. Dunlop neglected it rather surprisingly, and until Professor Raleig
h's chapter on the subject there was little of a satisfactory kind to be found about it anywher
e. It must, however, be admitted that the abstainers from it have been to some ex
tent justified in their abstention. The subject is a curious one: and it has a
n important place in the history of the Novel, because it shows at once how strong was the nisus t
owards prose fiction and how surprisingly difficult writers seem, nevertheless, to have found it 
to hit upon anything really good, much more anything really original i
n kind. For it is hardly too much to say that this century of attempt—we c
annot call it a century of invention—from Ford to Congreve, does not add a single
 piece of any considerable merit to the roll of English books. As for a masterpiece, th
ere is nothing in respect of which the use of such a word would not be purely rid
iculous. And yet the attempts are interesting to the historian, and should not be uninteresting t
o the historical student of literature. One or two of 
them have a sort of shadowy name and place in literary history already.
In tracing their progress and character, we must allow for t
wo native models: and for three foreign sources, one ancient, two modern, of influence. 
The Arcadia and Euphues, the former continuously, 
the latter by revival after an interval, exercised very great effect in the first half of the sevent
eenth century, during at least the earlier part of which the vogue of 
Amadis and its successors, as Englished by Anthony Munday a
nd others, likewise continued. The Greek romances also had much to do with the matter
: for the Elizabethan translators had introduced them to the vulgar, and the seventeenth 
century paid a good deal of attention to Greek. Then, when that ce
ntury itself was on its way, the pastoral romance of D'Urfé fi
rst, and the Calprenède-Scudéry productions in the second place, came to give a fresh impulse, a
nd something of a new turn. The actual translations of French and 
Spanish romance, shorter and longer, good, bad, and indifferent, are of imme
nse bulk and doubtless excited imitation: but we cannot possibly deal with them here. A bare l
ist would fill a chapter. But some work of more or les
s (generally less) originality, in at least adaptation, calls for a little individual not
ice: and some general characterisation may be added.
It may be desirable to prelude the story by a reminder to the reader that the gen
eral characteristics of these various sources were "harlequin" in their diversity of apparent colo
ur. The Amadis romances and, indeed, all the later
 examples of that great kind, such as Arthur of Little B
ritain, which Berners translated, were distinguished on the one side by a curious conventio
n of unsmooth running of the course of love, on the othe
r sometimes by a much greater licence of morality than their prede
cessors, and always by a prodigality of the "conjuro
r's supernatural"—witches and giants and magic black and white. The Spanish "picaresque" story 
was pretty real but even less decent: and its French imitations (though not usually reaching the l
icence of the short tale, which clung to fabliau ways in this respect) i
mitated it here also. The French heroic romance, on the other hand, observed the mos
t scrupulous propriety in language and situation: but aggravated the Amadisian troubling of the c
ourse of true love, and complicated everything, very frequently if no
t invariably, by an insinuated "key" interest of identification of the ancient
 personages selected as heroes and heroines with mode
rn personages of quality and distinction.
Emanuel Ford (whom the British Museum catalogue insists on spelling Forde and of whom v
ery little seems to be known) published Parismus, Prince of Bohemia, as earl
y as 1598. In less than a hundred years (1696) it had reached
 its fourteenth edition, and it continued to be popular in
 abridged and chap-booked form2 far into the eighteenth century. (It is sometimes called Parismus
 and Parismenus: the second part being, as very commonly in romances of the c
lass after the Amadis pattern, occupied largely with the adventures of the son of the her
o of the first.) On the whole, Parismus, though it has few pretensions 
to elegance of style, and though some delicate tastes have been shocked at certain lic
ences of incident, description, and phrase in it, is quite the best 
of our bunch in this kind. It is, in general conceptio
n, pure Amadis of the later and slightly degraded type. Laurana, the heroine (of whom a peculiarl
y hideous portrait adorns the black-letter editions side by side with Parismus himself, 
who is rather a "jolly gentleman") is won with much less difficulty and in much l
ess time than Oriana—but separations and difficulties duly follow in "d
esolate isles" and the like. And though Parismus hi
mself is less of an Amadis than Amadis, the "contrast of friends," founded by that hero and
 Galaor, is kept up by his association with a certain Pollipus—"a man of his ha
nds" if ever there was one, for with them he literally wrings the neck of the enchantress
 Bellona, who has enticed him to embrace her. There is plenty of 
the book, as there always should be in its kind (between 400 and 5
00 very closely printed quarto pages), and its bulk is composed of proportionately p
lentiful fighting and love-making and of a very much smaller proportion of what schoolboys
 irreverently call "jaw" than is usual in the class. If it were not for the black letter (which is 
trying to the eyes) I should not myself object to have no other reading than Parismus for some holid
ay evenings, or even after pretty tough days of literary and professional work. T
he Famous History of Montelion, the Knight of the Oracle (1633?) proclaims
 its Amadisian type even more clearly: but I have o
nly read it in an abridged edition of the close of the century. I should imagine th
at in extenso it was a good deal duller than Parismus. And of 
course the comparative praise which has been given to that book must be subject to the remin
der that it is what it is—a romance of disorderly and what some people call childish advent
ure, and of the above-ticketed "conjuror's supernatural." If anybo
dy cannot read Amadis itself, he certainly will not read Parismus: and perhaps not e
verybody who can manage the original—perhaps not even everybody who can manage Palmerin—
could put up with Ford's copy. I can take this Ford as I fin
d him: but I am not sure that I would go much lower.
Ornatus and Artesia (1607?), on the other hand—his second or third book—strikes me as owing mor
e to Heliodorus than to Montalvo, or Lobeira, or whoever was the author
 of the great romance of the last chivalric type. There are more intricacies in it; the
 heroine plays a rather more important part; there is e
ven something of a nearer approach to modern novel-ways in
 this production, which reappeared at "Grub Street near the Upper Pump" in the year 1650. Orn
atus sees his mistress asleep and in a kind of desh
abille, employs a noble go-between, Adellena (a queer spel
ling of "Adelina" which may be intentional), is rejected with 
apparent indignation, of course; writes elaborate letters in vain, but
 overhears Artesia soliloquising confession of her love f
or him and disguises himself as a girl, Silvia. Then the villain of the piece, Floretus, to o
btain the love of this supposed Silvia, murders a person of distinction and plots to poison
 Artesia herself. Ornatus-Silvia is banished: and all sorts of adv
entures and disguises follow, entirely in the Greek style. The book is not very long, exten
ding only to signature R in a very small quarto. Except that it
 is much less lively and considerably less "free," it reminds one rather in 
type of Kynaston's verse Leoline and Sydanis. In fact the verse and pro
se romances of the time are very closely connected: and Chamberlayne's Pharonnida—far the finest
 production of the English "heroic" school in prose, verse, or drama—was, 
when the fancy for abridging set in, condensed into a tiny prose Eromena. But
 Ornatus and Artesia, if more modern, more decent, and less extravagant than Parismus, 
is nothing like so interesting to read. It is indeed quite possible that th
ere is, if not in it, in its popularity, a set-back to the Arcadia itself, which had been directl
y followed in Lady Mary Wroth's Urania (1621), and to which (by the time of the editio
n noted) Charles I.'s admiration—so indecently and ignobly referred to by Milton—h
ad given a fresh attraction for all good anti-Puritans. That an anti-Puri
tan should be a romance-lover was almost a necessity.
When the French "heroics" began to appear it was only natura
l that they should be translated, and scarcely less so that they should be imitated in 
England. For they were not far off the Arcadia pattern: and they were a distinct and considerabl
e effort to supply the appetite for fiction which has 
been dwelt upon. But except for this, and for fashion's sake, they did not contain much that wo
uld appeal to an English taste: and it is a little significant that one great reader of them who
 is known to us—Mrs. Pepys—was a Frenchwoman. Indeed, save for th
e very considerable "pastime" of a kind that they gave t
o a time, much of which required passing, it is di
fficult to understand their attraction for English readers
. Their interminable talk never (till perhaps very recently) was a thing to suit our nation
: and the "key" interest strikes us at any rate as of the most languid kind. But they were imitated 
as well as translated: and the three most famous of the imitations are the work of men of mark in t
heir different ways. These are the Parthenissa (1654) of Roger Boyle, Lo
rd Broghill and Earl of Orrery; the Aretina (1661) of Sir George Mackenzie; and the Pandion and Am
phigeneia (1665) of "starch Johnny" Crowne.
Boyle was a strong Francophile in literature, and his not inconside
rable influence on the development of the heroic play showed it only les
s decidedly than his imitation of the Scudéry romance. I cannot say that I have read Partheniss
a through: and I can say that I do not intend to do so. 
It is enough to have read Sainte Madeleine of the Ink-Desert herself, without read
ing bad imitations of her. But I have read enough to know that Partheniss
a would never give me anything like the modified satisfaction that 
is given by Parismus: and after all, if a man will not take the
 trouble to finish writing his book (which Orrery never did) why should his readers tak
e the trouble even to finish reading what he has written? The scene is Parthia, with alternation
 to Syria, and diversions and episodes elsewhere: and thou
gh there is a certain amount of fighting, the staple is quite decorous 
but exceedingly dull love-making, conducted partly in the endless dialogue (or rather automa
tic monologue) already referred to, and partly in letters more "handsome" even than Mr.
 Frank Churchill's, and probably a good deal more sincere in their convention
al way, but pretty certainly less amusing. The original attraction indeed
 of this class of novel consisted, and, in so far as it still exis
ts, may be said to consist, in noble sentiment, elegantly expressed. It deserv
ed, and in a manner deserves, the commendatory part of Aramis's rebuk
e to Porthos for expressing impatience with the complim
ents between Athos and D'Artagnan at their first and hostile rencounter.3 Otherwi
se there is not much to be said for it. It does not indeed deserve Johnson's often quoted re
mark as to Richardson (on whom when we come to him we shall have something more to say in
 connection with these heroic romances), if any one were to 
read Parthenissa for the story he would not, unless he were a very impulsive person, "
hang himself." He would simply, after a number of pages varying with the individual, cease to read 
it.
The work of the great Lord Advocate who was traduced by
 Covenanting malice is in a certain sense more interesting: and that not me
rely because it is much shorter. Aretina or The Serious Romance, opens with an "apology for
 Romances" generally, which goes far to justify Dryden'
s high opinion of Mackenzie as a critic. But it can
not be said to be much—it is a little—more interesting as a 
story than Parthenissa, and it is written in a most singular lingo—not disp
laying the racy quaintness of Mackenzie's elder contemporary and fellow-loyalist Urquha
rt, but a sort of Scotified and modernised Euphuism rather 
terrible to peruse. A library is "a bibliotheck richly tapestried with books
." Somebody possesses, or is compared to "a cacochymick stomach, which transubstantiat
es the best of meats in its own malignant humour." And when the hero meets a 
pair of cannibal ruffians he confronts one and "pulling out a pistol, sends from its barrel two ball
s clothed in Death's livery, and by them opens a sa
llyport to his soul to fly out of that nasty prison." A certain zest may be given by these o
ddities, but it hardly lasts out more than 400 pages: and though the
 lives of Aretina and Philaretes are more simply and straightforw
ardly told than might be thought likely—though there are ingenious disguises of contemporar
y politics, and though Mackenzie was both a wise man and a wit—it is more certain than ever, wh
en we close his book, that this is not the way of the world, nor the man to walk in that 
way.
Pandion and Amphigeneia is the inferior in importance of both
 these books. Crowne had perhaps rather more talent than it is usual to credit
 him with, but he does not show it here. I think Sir Walter Raleigh is qui
te right in regarding the book as more or less traced over the Arcad
ia: and it may be said to have all the defects of Sidney'
s scheme—which, it is fair once more to observe, we do not possess in any form definitely settle
d by its author—with none of the merits of his orna
ment, his execution, and his atmosphere of poetic fancy.
The fact is that this heroic romance was foredoomed to 
inefficiency. It was not a genuine kind at all: but a sort of patchwork of imitations of im
itations—a mule which, unlike the natural animal, was itself bred, and bred in and in,
 of mules for generations back. It was true to no time, to no country, t
o no system of manners, life, or thought. Its oldest ancestor in 
one sense, though not in another—the Greek romance—was itself the growth of the la
test and most artificial period of the literature to which it belonge
d. The pure mediæval romance of chivalry was another,
 but of this it had practically nothing left. The Amadis class, the late Rena
issance pastorals, the immediately preceding or accompanying French romance
s of the Scudéry type, were, in increasing degree, hybrid, artificial, and dead-
alive. Impotence and sterility in every sense could but be its portion. Of the two great
 qualities of the novel—Variety and Life—it had never succeeded in a
ttaining any considerable share, and it had now the merest 
show of variety and no life at all. There is hardl
y anything to be said in its favour, except that its vogue, as has been o
bserved, testified to the craving for prose fiction, and kept at least a simula
crum of that fiction before the public. How far there may be
 any real, though metaphysical, connection between the great dramatic output of t
his seventeenth century in England and its small production in no
vel is a question not to be discussed here. But undoubtedly the fact of the
 contrast is a "document in the case," and one of the most important in its own direction; co
mpleting the testimony of the mediæval period in the other (that as romance dwindle
d, drama grew) and leading up to that of the eighteenth century when 
drama dwindled and the novel grew. The practice of Afra Behn in both, and the fact tha
t Congreve, the greatest English dramatist of the close of the centur
y, began with a novel and deserted the style for drama, are also interesting, 
and combine themselves very apparently with the considerations just gl
anced at. But Congreve and Afra must be postponed for a moment.
The two last discussed books, with Eromena and some others, are posterior to the Restoration in d
ate, but somewhat earlier in type. The reign of Charles II., besides the "heroic" rom
ances and Bunyan, and one most curious little production to be noti
ced presently, is properly represented in fiction by two writers, to w
hom, by those who like to make discoveries, considerable 
importance has sometimes been assigned in the history of the English No
vel. These are Richard Head and Afra Behn, otherwise "the divine Astræa." I
t is, however, something of an injustice to class them together: for Afra was a woman o
f very great ability, with a suspicion of genius, while Hea
d was at the very best a bookmaker of not quite the lowest order, though prett
y near it. Of The English Rogue (1665-1680), which earns him his place here, only the first
 part, and a certain section of the fourth, are even attributed to hi
m by Francis Kirkman, the Curll of his generation, who published the thing at intervals 
and admittedly wrote parts of it himself. It is quite openly
 a picaresque novel: and imitated not merely from the Spanish originals but from Sorel
's Francion, which had appeared in France some forty years before. Yet, 
if we compare this latter curious book with Head's we shall see how 
very far behind, even with forty years' advantage in time
, was the country which, in the next century, was practically to create the m
odern novel. Francion is not a work of genius: and it does not pretend to much more than the usual 
picaresque farrago of adventure, unmoral and sometimes rather cruel, but comic of a kind
, strung together with little art in fable, and less in character. But the author
 is to some extent "cumbered about serving." He names his characters, t
ries to give them some vague personality, furnishes them with some roughly and sketchily painted s
cenery, and gives us not merely told tales, but occasionally something distantly resembling convers
ation. Head takes no trouble of this kind: and Kirkman does 
not seem to think that any such thing is required of him. Very few of the characters of
 The English Rogue have so much as a name to their backs: they are "a prentice," "a master," "a m
istress," "a servant," "a daughter," "a tapster," etc. They are invested with hardly the slightest i
ndividuality: the very hero is a scoundrel as characterless as he is nameless:4 he is the mere thre
ad which keeps the beads of the story together after a fashion. These beads themsel
ves, moreover, are only the old anecdotes of "cone
y-catching," over-reaching, and worse, which had separately filled a thousand fab
liaux, novelle, "jests," and so forth: and which are now flung together
 in gross, chiefly by the excessively clumsy and unimaginative expedien
t of making the personages tell long strings of them as their own experien
ce. When anything more is wanted, accounts of the manner
s of foreign countries, taken from "voyage-and-travel" books; of the t
ricks of particular trades (as here of piratical book-selling); of an
ything and everything that the writer's dull fancy can think of, are foisted in. The thing is i
n four volumes, and it seems that a fifth was intended as a clo
se: but there is no particular reason why it should not hav
e extended to forty or fifty, nay to four or five hundr
ed. It could have had no real end, just as it has no real beginning or middle.
One other point deserves notice. The tone of the Spanish and French picaresque novel had never bee
n high: but it is curiously degraded in this English example. Furetière honestly called h
is book Roman Bourgeois. Head might have called his, if he had written in French, Roman Ca
naille. Not merely the sentiments but the very outward
 trappings and accidents of gentility are banished from the book. Yet we do not get an
y real reality in compensation. Head is no Defoe: he can give us the c
ompany that Colonel Jack kept in his youth and Moll Flanders in her midd
le age: but he makes not the slightest attempt to give us Moll or Jack, o
r even Moll's or Jack's habit, environment, novel-furniture of any kind whatsoever. The rec
eipt to make The English Rogue is simply this: "Take from two to three dozen Elizabethan pamph
lets of different kinds, but principally of the 'con
ey-catching' variety, and string them together by making a batch of shadowy personages te
ll them to each other when they are not acting in them." Except in a dim sort of idea that
 a novel should have some bulk and substance, it is difficult to see any advance w
hatever in this muck-heap—which the present writer, having had to read it a se
cond time for the present purpose, most heartily hopes to be able to l
eave henceforth undisturbed on his shelves.
Not in this fashion must the illustrious Afra be spoken of. It is true that—since it ceas
ed to be the fashion merely to dismiss her with a "fie-fie!" whic
h her prose work, at any rate, by no means merits—the
re has sometimes been a tendency rather to overdo praise of her, not
 merely in reference to her lyrics, some of which can never be prais
ed too highly, but in reference to these novels. Oroonoko or The Royal Sl
ave, with its celebration of the virtues of a noble negro and his lov
e for his Imoinda, and his brutal ill-treatment and death by torture a
t the hands of white murderers, undoubtedly took the fancy of the public. But to see
 at once Rousseau and Byron in it, Chateaubriand and Wilberforce 
and I know not what else, is rather in the "lunatic, lover, and poet" order of vision. Even He
ad and Kirkman, as we have observed, had perceived the advantage of forei
gn scenery and travel to vary their matter; Afra had herself been in Guiana
; and, as she was of a very inflammable disposition, it is quite possible
 that some Indian Othello had caught her fresh imagination. On the other hand, there was the he
roic romance, with all its sighs and flames, still the rage: and a much 
less nimble intellect than Afra's, with a much less cosmopolitan experie
nce, might easily see the use of transposing it into a new key. Still, th
ere is no doubt that The Royal Slave and even its companions are far above the dull, dirty, and neve
r more than half alive stuff of The English Rogue. Oroonoko is a story, not a pamphlet or a mere "
coney-catching" jest. To say that it wants either contraction or expansion; less "talk about i
t" and more actual conversation; a stronger projection of character and other thin
gs; is merely to say that it is an experiment in the infancy of the novel, not a f
ollowing out of secrets already divulged. It certain
ly is the first prose story in English which can be ranked with things that already existed i
n foreign literatures. Nor is it the only one of the batch in which advance is seen. "The Ki
ng of Bantam," for instance, is the account of an "extravagant," though not quite a
 fool, who is "coney-catched" in the old manner. But i
t opens in a fashion very different indeed from the old manner. "This money is certainly a most d
evilish thing! I'm sure the want of it had been like to ruin my dear Ph
ilibella!" and the succeeding adventures are pretty f
reshly told. The trick of headlong overture was a favourite with Afra. "The Adventure of t
he Black Lady" begins, "About the beginning of last June, as near as I can re
member, Bellamira came to town from Hampshire." It is a trick of course: and here
 probably borrowed from the French: but the line which separates trick from artis
tic device is an exceedingly narrow and winding one. At any rate, thi
s plunging into the middle of things wakes up the reader's attention, and does not permit him t
o doze. "The Lucky Mistake," on the other hand, opens w
ith a little landscape, "The river Loire has on its delightful banks, etc."
 "The Fair Jilt," a Bandello-like story, begins with an exaltation 
of Love: and so on. Now these things, though they may seem matters of course t
o the mere modern reader, were not matters of course then. Afra very likely imitated;
 her works have never been critically edited; and have not served as fie
ld for much origin-hunting. But whether she followed others or not, she led h
er own division. All these things and others are sig
ns of an awakened conscience—of a sense of the fact that fiction,
 to be literature, must be something more than the relation of
 a bare fact, tragic, comic, or neutral—that the novelist is a c
ook, and must prepare and serve his materials with a sauce as much his 
own as possible, of plot, arrangement, character-drawing, scenery, conversation, reflecti
on, and what not. That conversation itself—the subtlest instrument of all and the most ef
fective for constructing character—is so little developed, ca
n only, I think, be accounted for by supposing Afra and others
 to be under the not unnatural mistake that conversation especially belon
ged to the drama, which was still the most popular f
orm of literature, and in which she herself was a copi
ous practitioner. But this mistake was not long to prevail: and it had no ef
fect on that great contemporary of hers who would, it is to be feared, have used the harshest
 language respecting her, and to whom we now come.
It is impossible to share, and not very easy even to understand, t
he scruples of those who would not admit John Bunyan to a place in the hierarchy an
d the pedigree of the English novel, or would at best grant him an outside po
sition in relation to it. Their exquisite reasons, so far as one can discern them, appe
ar to be (or to concern) the facts that The Pilgrim's Progress and The Holy War are religious, and
 that they are allegories.5 It may be humbly suggested that by applying the double rule to verse w
e can exclude Paradise Lost and the Faerie Queene from the s
uccession of English Poetry, whereby no doubt we shall be finely holden in understanding the same:
 while it is by no means certain that, if the exclusion of allegory be pushed home
, we must not cancel Don Quixote from the list of the world's novels. Even in prose, to speak 
plainly, the hesitation—unless it comes from the foolish dislike to things 
religious, as such, which has been the bigotry of the last generation or two—comes from the almo
st equally foolish determination to draw up arbitrary laws of lite
rary kind. Discarding prejudice and punctilio, every one must surely see t
hat, in diminishing measure, even The Holy War is a novel, and that The Pilg
rim's Progress has every one of the four requisites—plot, character, description, and dia
logue—while one of these requisites—character with its accessory manners—i
s further developed in the History of Mr. Badman after a
 fashion for which we shall look vainly in any division of European literature (except
 drama) before it. This latter fact has indeed obtained a fai
r amount of recognition since Mr. Froude drew the attention of the general 
reader to it in his book on Bunyan, in the "English Men o
f Letters" series, five-and-twenty years ago: but it must have struck 
careful readers of the great tinker's minor works lon
g before. Indeed there are very good internal reaso
ns for thinking that no less a person than Thackeray must have known Mr. 
Badman. This wonderful little sketch, however—the related history of a m
an who is an utter rascal both in family and commercial relations, but pr
eserves his reputation intact and does not even experience any deathbed repe
ntance—is rather an unconscious study for a character in a n
ovel—a sketch of a bourgeois Barnes Newcome—than anything more. I
t has the old drawback of being narrated, not acted or spoken at first hand: and so, t
hough it is in a sense Fielding at nearly his best, more 
than half a century before Fielding attempted Joseph Andrews, no more need be said of
 it. So, too, the religious element and the allegory are too prominent in The Hol
y War—the novelist's desk is made too much of a pulpit in large part
s of it. Other parts, concerning the inhabitants of Mansoul and their private affairs, are 
domestic novel-writing of nearly the pure kind: and if The Pilgrim's Progress 
did not exist, it would be worth while to pick them out and di
scuss them. But, as it most fortunately does exist, this is not needful.
The only fault with the novel-character of the greater book which might possi
bly be found by a critic who did not let the allegory bite him, and was not fright
ened by the religion, is that there is next to no love eleme
nt in it, though there are wedding bells. Mercy is indeed quite nice enou
gh for a heroine: but Bunyan might have bestowed her better than on
 a young gentleman so very young that he had not long before made hi
mself (no doubt allegorically) ill with unripe and unwholesome fruit. 
But if he had done so, the suspicions of his brethren—they were a
cute enough as it was not to mistake the character of the book, whatever modern criti
cs may do—would have been even more unallayable. And, as it is, the "alluring countenance" d
oes shed not a little grace upon the story, or at least upon the
 Second Part: while the intenser character of the First hardly requires this. Any other l
ack is, to the present writer, imperceptible. The romance interest of quest, adventure, achiev
ement, is present to the fullest degree: and what is sometimes calle
d the pure novel interest of character and conversation is
 present in a degree not lower. It must be accepted as a great blessing, even by those who r
egard Puritanism as an almost unmitigated curse, that its principle
s forbade Bunyan to think of choosing the profane and abominable stage-play as the form of his cre
ation. We had had our fill of good plays, and were be
ginning to drink of that which was worse: while we had no good novels and wanted t
hem. Of course the large amount of actual "Tig and Tirry" dialogue (as Dr. Johns
on would say) is probably one of the things which have made precisians shy of
 accepting the Progress for what it really is. But we must remember that this 
encroachment on the dramatic province was exactly what 
was wanted to remove the reproach of fiction. The inability to put 
actual conversation of a lively kind in the mouths of pers
onages has been indicated as one of the great defects of the novel 
up to this time. Except Cervantes, it is difficult to think of any novelist 
who had shown himself able to supply the want. Bunyan can do it as few have done it even sin
ce his time. The famous dialogue of Christian and By-ends is only the best—if i
t is the best—of scores nearly or quite as good. The curious intellectual flacci
dity of the present day seems to be "put off" by the "ticket" names; but no one who has
 the true literary sense cares for these one way or an
other, or is more disturbed by them than if they were Wilkins an
d Jones. Just as Coleridge observed that to enjoy some kinds of poetry you must suspend disbe
lief, so, with mere literary fashions, you must suspend di
sagreement. We should not call By-ends By-ends now: and
 whether we should do better or worse nobody, as Plato says, k
nows but the Deity. But the best of us would be hard 
put to it to make By-ends reveal his By-endishness more perfectl
y than he does by his conversation, and without any ticket-name at all.
Not less remarkable, and only a little less new, is the vividness and sufficiency of 
the scene painting and setting. It has been said that the great novelists not only provide us wit
h a world of friends more real and enjoyable than the actual folk we know,
 but also with a world for those friends to live in, more real and far more enjoyable than th
e world in which we ourselves sojourn. And this is well seen of Christian. The
 Slough of Despond and the terrible overhanging hi
ll; the gateway and the Interpreter's House and the House Beautiful; the ups and downs of t
he road, and the arbours and the giants' dens: Beulah and the Delectable Mountains:—one kn
ows them as one knows the country that one has walked over, and perhaps even bet
ter. There is no description for description's sake: yet nothing
 is wanting of the descriptive kind.
Yet all these things are—as they should be—only su
bsidiary to the main interest of the Pilgrimage itself. Once more, one may fear tha
t it is no good sign of the wits of the age that readers should be unable to discard famil
iarity with the argument of the story. It is the way in which that argume
nt is worked out and illustrated that is the thing. I have never myself,
 since I became thoroughly acquainted with Lydgate's Engli
shing of Deguilevile's Pilgrimage of the Soul of Man, had any doubt that—in so
me way or other, direct or indirect, at tenth or twentieth hand per
haps—Bunyan was acquainted with it: but this is of no importance. He might undoubtedly h
ave got all his materials straight out of the Bible. But his working of them up i
s all his own, and is wonderful. Here, to begin with, is
 the marvel not merely of a continuation which is not a fa
lling off, but of a repetition of the same general scheme with differen
t but closely connected personages, which is entirely free from monotony. O
ne is so accustomed to the facts that perhaps it hardly strikes one at first
 how extraordinarily audacious the attempt is: nay, the very success of it may blind all but c
ritics to the difficulty. It is no wonder that people tried f
urther continuations and further complications: still less wonder
 that they utterly failed. Probably even Bunyan himself could not 
have "done it a third time." But he did it these twice with such vividness of figure and
 action; such completeness of fable; such sufficiency of behaviour and of
 speech as have scarcely ever been equalled. As ideal as 
Spenser, as real as Defoe: such is Bunyan. And he shows th
is realism and this idealism in a prose narrative, bringin
g the thoughts and actions and characters and speech of fictiti
ous human beings before his readers—for their inspection perhaps; for their del
ight certainly. If this is not the being and the doing of a novelist this
 deponent very humbly declareth that he knoweth not what the being and 
the doing of a novelist are.
We must now turn to two small but noteworthy attempts at the kind, which have been r
eferred to above.
In 1668 there appeared a very curious little book (entitled at great length after the mann
er of the times, but more shortly called The Isle of Pines), which is important in the literary 
ancestry of Defoe and Swift and not unimportant in itse
lf. Its author was Henry Neville, of the Nevilles of Billingbeare, son of one Sir H
enry and grandson of another, the grandfather having been of some mark in diplomacy and courtiersh
ip in late Elizabethan and early Jacobean times. The grandson had had a life of some stir 
earlier. Born in 1620, and educated at Merton and Univers
ity Colleges, he had left Oxford without a degree, had taken the Parlia
mentary side, but as a rigid Republican and anti-Cromwellite; had been a member of the Rota, and a
fter the Restoration had been arrested in 1663 for supposed treasonable practices, but escap
ed serious punishment. He lived quietly for more than
 thirty years longer and died in 1694. Besides The Isle of Pines he wrote satirical tracts (the 
Parliament of Ladies being the best known), translated Machiavelli, and was evident
ly a man of parts, though, like his friend Harrington, something of a "crank." H
e seems also to have been, as some others of the extremer Puritans certainly were, prett
y loose in his construction of moral laws.
The Isle is a very short book of thirty-one quarto pages: but the
re is a good deal in it, and it must have been very carefully written. A ce
rtain Cornelius van Sloetten writes, "supported by letters from Amsterdam," how a Dut
ch ship, driven far out of reckoning in the Southern Ocean, comes to a "fourth isla
nd, near Terra Australis Incognita," which is inha
bited by white people, speaking English, but mostly naked. The headman is a certain William Pine
, whose grandfather, George, has left a written account of the origin of the community. T
his relates how George was wrecked on the island, the ship perishing "with man and mouse," excep
t himself, his master's daughter, two white maidservants,
 and a negro girl. The island proves pleasant and habitable: and George,
 to prevent unfairness and ill-feeling, unites himself to all his fem
ale companions, the quintet living in perfect harmony. Thirty-seven children result: an
d these at first necessarily intermarry; but after this first generation, a rule 
is made that brothers and sisters may not unite—the descendants of the four original wives
 forming clans who may marry into the others but not in
to their own. A wider legal code of fair stringency is arrang
ed, with the sanction of capital and other punishments: and things go so well tha
t the patriarch musters a tribe of 565 persons by the time
 he is sixty, and of 1789 twenty years later, when he departs this life, piously pra
ying God "to multiply them and send them the true report of the gospel." Th
e multiplication has duly taken place, and there is something like a civil war while the Dutch 
are there; but they interfere with fire-arms to restore o
rder, and leave all well. The writer's cunning is shown by the fact that he does not stop abruptly: 
but finishes off with some subsequent and quite verisimilar experiences of the Dutch ship. The book 
does not appear to have had a very great popularity in England, though it was reprinted and ab
ridged at least once, pretty shortly. But it was very popular abroad, was translated into
 three or four languages, and was apparently taken as a genuine account.
Neville's art is in fact not inconsiderable. Earlier voyage
s and travels of course supplied him with his technical and ge
ographical details: and the codification of the Isle
 of Pines suggests the Bacon-Harrington tradition. 
But he has got the vividness and realism which have usually been lacking before: and th
ough some of his details are pretty "free" it is by no means only through such things th
at these qualities are secured. To Cyrano de Bergerac he bears n
o likeness at all. In fact, though Neville was a satirist, satire does not seem to
 have been in any way his object here. Whatever that o
bject may have been, he has certainly struck, by accident or not, on the secret of produci
ng an interesting account by ingeniously multiplied and adjusted detail. Moreover, as
 there is no conversation, the book stands—accidentally this tim
e almost without doubt—at the opposite pole from the talk-
deluged romances of the Scudéry type. Whether Defoe a
ctually knew it or not matters exceedingly little: that something of his method, and in a manner 
the subject of his first and most famous novel, are here before him, seems quite indisputable. 
Perhaps not the least piquant thing to do with The Isle of Pines is to contrast it with 
Oceana. Of course the contrast is unfair: nearly all contrasts
 are. But there is actually, as has been pointed out, a slight contact between th
e work of the two friends: and their complete difference in every other r
espect makes this more curiously apparent. And another odd thing is that Neville—"Rota"-republica
n as he was—should have adopted patriarchal (one can hardly say
 legitimate) government here.
Congreve's Incognita (1692), the last seventeenth-
century novel that requires special notice, belongs much more to the cla
ss of Afra's tales than to that of the heroic romances. It is a short story of sev
enty-five small pages only and of the Italian-Spanish imbroglio type. The friends Aurelian an
d Hippolito take each other's names for certain purposes, and their beloveds, "Incognita," Juliana 
and Leonora, are perplexed accordingly: while family feuds, letter assignations 
at a convent where the name of the convent unluckily happe
ns to be torn off, and other stock ingredients of the kind are freely used. Most write
rs have either said nothing about the book or have given it scanty praise; with the exception
, Sir Walter Raleigh, I confess that I cannot here agree. Being Congreve's it could not be 
quite without flashes of wit, but they do not appear to me to be either very
 numerous or very brilliant; the plot, such as it is, is a plot of dra
ma rather than of fiction; and there is no character that I can see. It is in fact only one of a
 vast multitude of similar stories, not merely in the two languages just refer
red to, but in French, which were but to show that the time of the novel was not yet come, 
even when the time of this century was all but over.
It was quite over, and the first two decades of the next were all but over too, before the way
 was, to any important extent, further explored: but important assistance 
in the exploration was given at the beginning of the second of these decades. The history o
f the question of the relations of the Addison-Steel
e periodical, and especially of the "Coverley Papers," to t
he novel is both instructive and amusing to those who have come to appreciate the humours of litera
ry things. It would probably have shocked the more orthodox admirers of the Spectator, during th
e eighteenth century, to have any such connection or relation so much as hinted. But when
 people began to consider literature and literary history in a better arranged perspective, the f
act that there is such a connection or relation must have
 been soon perceived. It has become comparatively a com
monplace: and now the third stage—that in which people b
ecome uneasy and suspicious of the commonplace and obvious and try to turn it topsy-
turvy—has begun.
It is of course undeniable that the "Coverley Paper
s," as they stand, are not a novel, even on the loosest conception and construc
tion of the term. There is no plot; some of what shou
ld be the most important characters are merely heard of, not seen; and
 the various scenes have no sort of connection, except that the same persons figure in t
hem. But these undeniable facts do not interfere with two other facts,
 equally undeniable and much more important. The first is that the papers coul
d be turned into a novel with hardly any important alteration, and with only q
uantum suff. of addition and completion. "The widow" is there in the b
ackground ready to be produced and made a heroine; many of the inc
idents are told novel-fashion already, and more could b
e translated into that fashion by the veriest tyro at novel writing who has written
 at any time during the last one hundred and fifty years. The per
sonages of the club have merely to step down and out; the 
scenes to be connected, amplified, and multiplied; the c
onversation to undergo the same process.
But the second point is of greater importance still. Not only could the "Coverley Papers,
" be made into a novel without the slightest difficulty, and by a pro
cess much of which would be simple enlargement of material; but th
ey already possess, in a fashion which requires no alteration at all, many of the features of the n
ovel, far more successfully hit off than had ever been done be
fore in the novel itself. This is true of the dialo
gue to no small extent, and of the description even more: but it
 is truest of all of the characters. Except Bunyan, nobod
y in prose fiction had ever made personages so thoroughly spirited as Si
r Roger and even the two Wills, Honeycomb and Wimble; while h
ere there was "no allaying Thames" in the shape of al
legory, little moralising and that of a kind quite human, a plentiful setting of ordinary and famil
iar scene, and a more plentiful and exact adjustment of ordinary and fa
miliar manners. It is true that Addison, partly owi
ng to the undercurrent of his satirical humour (Steele succeeds rather better
 here), has not attained the astonishing verisimilitude of the writer t
o whom we shall come next and last but one in this chapter. His characters are perfectly natura
l, but we know, all the while, that they are works of art. But
 in most of the points just mentioned he has exactly the tricks of the novelist's art that Defoe has
 not. The smaller tales in the Tatler and its followers undoubtedly did something to remove the repr
oach from prose fiction, and more to sharpen the appetite for it. But t
hey were nothing new: the short tale being of unknown antiquity. Th
e "Coverley Papers" were new and did much more. This new kind of 
treatment may not have suggested beforehand (it is not certain that it did not) the 
extensive novel of character and manners—the play lengthened, bodied more strong
ly, and turned into narrative form. But the process was there; the instanc
es of it were highly reputed and widely known. It must in almost a
ny case have gone hard but a further step still would be taken. It 
was actually taken by the person who had suggested the periodical essay itself.
Much has been written about Defoe, but, curiously enough, the least part of what has been writt
en about him has concerned the very part of him that is read—his novels. Nay, occasional
 eccentrics, and not only these, have shown a sort of disposition to belittle him as a noveli
st: indeed the stock description of Richardson as the Father of the Eng
lish Novel almost pointedly rules Defoe out. Yet further, the most adequate 
and intelligent appreciation of his novel work itse
lf has too often been mainly confined to what is n
o doubt a subject of exceeding interest—the special means by which he secures t
he attention, and procures the delight, of his readers. We shall have to d
eal with this too. But the point to which it is wished to draw special attention 
now is different, and we may reach it best by the ordinary "statement of case."
Almost everybody who knows any literary history, knows that the book by which, af
ter thirty or forty years of restless publication in all sorts of prose and rhyme, D
efoe niched himself immovably in English literature, was a new departure
 by almost an old man. He was all but, if not quite,
 sixty when Robinson Crusoe appeared: and a very few following years saw the appearance of his
 pretty voluminous "minor" novels. The subject of the first every o
ne knows without limitation: it is not so certain, though vig
orous efforts have been made to popularise the others, that even their subjects are clear
ly known to many people. Captain Singleton (1720), Moll Flanders, and Colonel 
Jack (both 1722) are picaresque romances with tolerably sordid heroes and heroines, bu
t with the style entirely rejuvenated by Defoe's secret. Roxana (1724), a very p
uzzling book which is perhaps not entirely his writing, is of the same general class: the Voya
ge round the World (1725), the least interesting, but not u
ninteresting, is exactly what its title imports,—in other words, the "stuffing" of the Ro
binson pie without the game. The Memoirs of a Cavalier (1720) approach the histori
cal novel (or at least the similar "stuffing" of that) and
 have raised curious and probably insoluble questi
ons as to whether they are inventions at all—questions intimately connected with that gen
eral one referred to above. One or two minor things are sometimes added to the li
st: but they require no special notice. The seven books just mentioned are Defoe's contr
ibution to the English novel. Let us consider the quality of this contribution first—and t
hen the means used to attain it.
Their novel-quality (which, as has been hinted, has
 not been claimed so loudly or so steadily as it sh
ould have been for Defoe) is the quality of Story-Interest—and t
his, one dares say, he not only infused for the first time in full do
se, but practically introduced into the English novel, putting the best of the old 
mediæval romances aside and also putting aside The Pilgrim's Progress, which is not likely to have b
een without influence on himself. It may be said, "Oh! but the 
Amadis romances, and the Elizabethan novels, and the 'heroics' must have inter
ested or they would not have been read." This looks plau
sible, but is a mistake. Few people who have not studied the history of critici
sm know the respectable reluctance to be pleased with literature which
 distinguished mankind till very recent times; and which in fact kept the novel back or
 was itself maintained by the absence of the novel. In life people p
leased themselves irregularly enough: in literature they c
ould not get out of the idea that they ought to be instructed, that it was enough to be 
instructed, and that it was discreditable to ask for more. Even the poet w
as allowed to delight grudgingly and at his peril; was suspected becaus
e he did delight, and had to pay a sort of heavy licence-duty for it, in the shape 
of concomitant instruction to others and good behaviour in himself. In fact
 he was a publican who was bound to serve stodgy food as well 
as exhilarating drink.
It is impossible to doubt that people were similarly affected to the fiction of t
he Renaissance and the seventeenth century, at least in its longer examples—
for the smaller novelle could amuse in their own way sometimes, though they co
uld hardly absorb. It is equally impossible to imagine any one being "enthr
alled" by Euphues. Admiration, of a kind, must have bee
n the only passion excited by it. In the Arcadia there i
s a certain charm, but it belongs to the inset verse—to the almost Spens
erian visionariness of parts—to the gracious lulling atmosphere of the whole. If it 
had been published in three volumes, one cannot imagine the most enthusiastic novel-read
er knocking up a friend late at night for volume two or volume three. I have said t
hat I can read Parismus for pastime: but the pastime that it provides is certainly not ov
er-stimulating, and the mild stimulant becomes unsweeten
ed and unlemoned barley-water in books of the Parthenissa class. If with them conversi
ng one forgets all time, it must be by the influence of the kind go-between 
Sleep. We know, of course, that their contemporaries did not go to sleep over them: but it was
 because they felt that they were being done good to—that they were
 in the height of polite society—that their manners were being softene
d and not allowed to be gross. The time, in its blunt way, was fond of contrasting the
 attractions of a mistress on one side and "a friend and a bo
ttle" on the other. That a novel could enter into competit
ion with either or both, as an interesting and eve
n exciting means of passing the time, would have entered very few heads at all and have been con
temptuously dismissed from most of those that it did enter.
Addison and Steele in the "Coverley Papers" had shown the way to construct this new sp
ell: Defoe actually constructed it. It may be that some may question whether the word "exciting" app
lies exactly to his stories. But this is logomachy: and in fact a well-willing reader 
can get very fairly excited while the Cavalier is escaping after Marston Mo
or; while it is doubtful whether the savages have really come and what will be the event; whil
e it is again doubtful whether Moll is caught or not; or 
what has become of those gains of the boy Jack, which can hardly be called il
l-gotten because there is such a perfect unconsciousness of ill on the part of the get
ter. At any rate, if such a reader cannot feel excitement here, he would 
utterly stagnate in any previous novel.
In presence of this superior—this emphatically and doubly "
novel"—interest, all other things become comparatively unimport
ant. The relations of Robinson Crusoe to Selkirk's exper
iences and to one or two other books (especially the already mentioned Isle o
f Pines) may not unfitly employ the literary historian who choos
es to occupy himself with them. The allegory which Defoe alleges i
n it, and which some biographers have endeavoured to work out, cannot, I suppose, be absolutely 
pooh-poohed, but presents no attractions whatever to the prese
nt writer. Whether the Cavalier is pure fiction, or partly embroidered fact, is a somew
hat interesting question, if only because it seems to be impossible to find out the answer
: and the same may be said of the not impossible (indeed
 almost more than probable) Portuguese maps and documents at the back of Captain Singleto
n. To disembroil the chronological muddle of Roxana, and fol
low out the tangles of the hide-and-seek of that most
 unpleasant "lady of pleasure" and her daughter, may suit some. But, apart from all th
ese things, there abides the fact that you can read the books—read them again and again—enjoy th
em most keenly at first and hardly less keenly afterwards, however often you re
peat the reading.
As has been partly said, the means by which this effect i
s achieved, and also the means by which it is not, are almost equall
y remarkable. The Four Elements of the novel are sometimes, 
and not incorrectly, said to be Plot, Character, De
scription, and Dialogue—Style, which some would make a fifth, bei
ng rather a characteristic in another order of division.
 It is curious that Defoe is rebellious or evasive under any analysis of this kind. 
His plots are of the "strong" order—the events succeed each other and are fairly co
nnected, but do not compose a history so much as a chronicle. In character, despite h
is intense verisimilitude, he is not very individu
al. Robinson himself, Moll, Jack, William the Quaker in Singleton, even Roxana t
he cold-blooded and covetous courtesan, cannot be said not to be real—they and almost every one 
of the minorities are an immense advance on the colourless and bloodless ticketed
 puppets of the Middle Fiction. But they still want something—the snap of the fingers
 of the artist. Moll is perhaps the most real of all of t
hem and yet one has no flash-sights of her being—never sees
 her standing out against soft blue sky or thunder-cloud as one sees the great char
acters of fiction; never hears her steps winding and recognises her gesture as one d
oes theirs.
So again his description is sufficient: and the enumerative particularity of it i
s even great part of the secret de Polichinelle to which we are coming. But it is 
far from elaborate in any other way and has hardly the least decoration or poetical quality. 
Well as we know Crusoe's Island the actual scenery of i
t is not half so much impressed as that even, for instance, of Masterman Ready's—it is e
ither of the human figures—Crusoe's own grotesque b
edizenment, the savages, Friday, the Spaniards, Will A
tkins—or of the works of man—the stockade, the boat, and the rest—that we thin
k. A little play is made with Jack's glass-house squalor and Roxana's magnificen
ce de mauvais lieu, but not much: the gold-dust and deserts of Si
ngleton are a necessary part of the "business," but nothing more. Moll Flanders—in some respects t
he greatest of all his books—has the bareness of an Elizabethan stage in scenery and
 properties—it is much if Greenfield spares us a table or a bed to furnish it.
Of Dialogue Defoe is specially fond—even making his personages soliloquise in this af
ter a fashion—and it plays a very important part in "the secret:" yet it can hardly b
e classed very high as dialogue. And this is at least partly due to the strange drab sha
pelessness of his style, which never takes on any brilli
ant colour, or quaint individual form.
Yet it is very questionable whether any other style wou
ld have suited the method so well, or would even have suited it at all. For this method—to l
eave off hinting at it and playing round it—is one of al
most endless accumulation of individually trivial incident, detail, and sometimes 
observation, the combined effect of which is to produce an i
nsensible but undoubting acceptance, on the reader's part, of the facts
 presented to him. The process has been more than 
once analysed in that curious and convenient miniature example of it, the "Mrs. Veal" supe
rcherie: but you may open the novels proper almost anywhere and discover it in 
full operation. Like most great processes of art, this is an ad
option and perfecting of habits usual with the most
 inartistic people—a turning to good account of the interminably circumstantial superfluities of the
 common gossip and newsmonger. Very often Defoe actually does not go beyon
d this—just as in The Shortest Way with the Dissent
ers he had simply reproduced the actual thoughts and wishes of those who disliked
 dissent. But sometimes he got the better of this also, as in the elab
orate building up of Robinson's surroundings and not a little in the other books. And there
 the effect is not only verisimilar but wonderful in its 
verisimilitude. At any rate, in him, and for English prose and secular fiction, we have first that
 mysterious charm of the real that is not real—of the "human creation"—which constitutes
 the appeal of the novel. In some of the books there is hardly any appeal of any other 
sort. Moll Flanders, though not unkindly, and "impro
per" rather from the force of circumstances than from any specially vicious inclination, is certai
nly not a person for whom one has much liking. Colonel Jack, after his youthf
ul experiences in pocket-picking, is rather a nonentity, s
omething of a coward, a fellow of no particular wits, parts, or definite qualities of any
 kind. Singleton is a rascal who "plays Charlemagne," as the French gambling term has i
t, and endows his repentance with the profits of his sin. As for Roxana there are few more repulsive
 heroines in fiction—while the Cavalier and the chief figure
 in the Voyage Round the World are simply threads on whic
h their respective adventures are strung. Even Robinson himself enlists no particular symp
athy except of the "put-yourself-in-his-place" kind. Yet t
hese sorry or negative personages, of whom, in the actual creation of Go
d, we should be content to know nothing except from paragraphs i
n the newspaper (and generally in the police-reports thereof), content
 us perfectly well with their company through hundreds and thousands of solid pages, and
 leave us perfectly ready to enjoy it again after a reasonable interval.
This, as has been said, is the mystery of fiction—a mystery partly set a-working in the m
ediæval romance, then mostly lost, and now recovered—in his
 own way and according to his own capacity—by Defoe. It was to escape othe
rs for a little longer and then to be yet again re
discovered by the great quartette of the mid-eight
eenth century—to slip in and out of hands during the later
 part of that century, and then to be all but finally established, in patterns for 
everlasting pursuance, by Miss Austen and by Scott. But Defoe is really (unless we put Bu
nyan before him) the first of the magicians—not the 
greatest by any means, but great and almost alone in the peculiar talent of making un
interesting things interesting—not by burlesquing them or satirising t
hem; not by suffusing or inflaming them with passion; not by giv
ing them the amber of style; but by serving them "simple of themselves" a
s though they actually existed.
The position of Defoe in novel history is so great that there is a temptation 
to end this chapter with him. But to do so would cause an inconve
nience greater than any resulting advantages. For the greatest of Defoe's contempora
ries in English letters also comes into our division, and comes best here. One cannot convenien
tly rank Swift with the great quartette of the next chapter, because he is a novelist "by interim" a
nd incompletely: to rank him among the minor and later novelists of the e
ighteenth century would be as to the first part of the classification absurd and as to the last